Jim Wilson and I shared a room at 410 Emerson
in the home of Mrs. Scotty Duncan Forbes.
If that's not an appropriate name for a splendid
Presbyterian lady of Scottish descent, I've
never heard one.
She and her ancient cat fossil
were special and unforgettable.
That year included
continuing the Naval Reserve and the expectation
of active duty beginning in June of 1954. More
importantly, I was trying to lay the groundwork
for what I assumed would be a lifetime
a record as a graduate student that would affect
the rest of my life.
The courses were demanding, but the faculty was
kind and sensitive.
And so when I left to go to report to active duty in
Charleston, South Carolina, the Naval Receiving
Station on June 15, I looked back on a year which I
thought had been comparatively successful.
And I certainly
expected to return to Rice in the fall of 1956.
When we landed at the receiving station in
Charleston
and made our way to the receiving station,
as we entered the
gate of that impressively large establishment,
a big black Marine greeted me in a memorable
manner.
Come on in these gates, boy.
You're in the Navy now. Your ass belongs to me.
at the first gathering of all of us, quote,
transients,
a
first-class petty officer
that we soon learned was nicknamed Ipana because
of the obvious distinctive lack of toothpaste
use,
which left his teeth unmistakably colored.
Dash told us not to unpack, make many phone calls,
or do anything because we would all be gone within
two weeks. In the meantime,
We were assigned to temporary task
as the cleanup crew for the receiving station.
Sweeping, mopping, cleaning out showers,
commodes.
And then I got assigned to the trash truck helping
lift 55 gallon barrels, which were then used as
trash barrels. Because there'd been a lot of late
spring rain, the barrels had collected a lot of
water.
So as we lifted them up, the holes in the bottom of
the barrel gave us each a fragrant shower.
All of the
men that arrived with me were soon gone, and I was a
sole survivor. Finally, after about three weeks,
I very hesitantly
made my way to the desk of the chief warrant
personnel officer.
told him my name and the fact that I had been there
longer than anticipated
and wondered if there was something I should do. He
looked up, called me by name, and then sent a fright
through my
brain as he mentioned as he said, oh, we have lost
your service record. We've been wondering where
you were, period, quote. Having heard the rumor
that the worst thing that could happen to an
enlisted
man was the loss of his record, I worried about my
fate.
Until he smiled and said, but we found it. It had
fallen between two
file boxes, between two filing cabinets.
Then he inquired, are you really a college
graduate? Have you been doing graduate work?
Proudly, I responded in the affirmative way, and
he said, well, then we're going to keep you here
because we're shorthanded.
He then pointed me toward the information and
education office where I would spend the
following two years worrying that they must have
somehow made a mistake because they gave me an
assignment for which I had preparation
and an interest. That
post included helping to prepare
dischargees for their post service education
whether returning to high school or going to
college,
to help administer the quarterly
printed tests for promotion for all enlisted
personnel,
and joining with educational efforts both on the
base and in the greater Charleston area.
The most interesting of those assignments came
late in the spring of 1956
before the United States officially transferred
to Japan two, quote, old World War II destroyers,
dash the first warships which the victorious
allies allowed the Japanese to operate after
World War II.
My task was to give a crash course in
conversational English to the Japanese enlisted
men, and I soon learned that they were the
brightest, most determined students I had ever
encountered.
One of the highlights, one of the enjoyable
highlights of those two years
resulted from a brief mention in the Charleston
paper that the backfield coach of the Cooper River
Blue Devils,
a football team composed of students from
North Charleston and Chicora, C-H-I-C-O-R-A,
high schools, the two high schools nearest the
base,
had just accepted appointment as head coach at
another high school as the 1955 season was
beginning.
The Blue Devil head coach, Hibby, H-I-B-B-Y,
Hibby Ayoub, A-Y-O-U-B,
expressed regret in the article that at such a late
date he could not hire an assistant coach and he
really needed a backfield coach.
Forgetting how little real athletic experience I
had had in two years of high school and two years of
two years each in high school and college, I went to
see Coach Ayoub and volunteered to assist him for
free, dash, if he could get me off the base at 3
o'clock, a reward for which I would have done
almost anything. That delightful
experience helped me become acquainted with a
wide variety of people in Charleston and an
emotional attachment with some very promising
young men whose careers have certainly
been marked with distinction.
Another
key event in those years was attendance at the
Southern Historical Association annual
convention
in Columbia, South Carolina
in the fall of 1955. At that meeting, I reinforced
connection to some
of the Instructors that had been so helpful. And
that my first year at Rice. And they introduced me
to a new.
Member of their group. Who would be joining them in
the fall of? 56.
Frank E Vandiver. Dr. Vandiver, the child prodigy
son of a mathematics faculty member at the
University of Texas, already had earned a
fine reputation as a
very young but talented Civil War scholar.
Thus, I thought about working with him because I
remembered that in the first year at Rice, the most
memorable course was a year-long seminar on Civil
War and Reconstruction guided by William B.
Hesseltine, H-E-S-S-E-L-T-I-N-E,
one of the most respected preparers of doctoral
students in the profession. Dr. Hesseltine, a
senior member of the faculty at the University of
Wisconsin, had a long list of students he had
prepared for true
leadership in history.
In the course of the seminar,
he gave us much care in how to write
prose, how to
maximize time on the, quote, time on the road,
doing research,
and suggested that when we picked out a
dissertation advisor, if possible, select
someone who was comparatively young, whose
reputation would grow, and
to
whom we would be able to turn for advice, counsel,
and job recommendations.
for decades to come.
Dr. Vandiver seemed like such an individual,
so I planned to work with him.
As the spring of 1956
came and I looked forward to
leaving Navy duty.
I began to think about dissertation topic
and talked with Dr. Vandiver about writing on the
role
of Presbyterians in the South during the Civil
War,
their breakaway from their
northern counterparts, and then the creation of
an entirely separate denomination.
He gave his general approval to that as a worthy
task.
And again, with Heseltine advice. As a guide.
Began to search for the primary location. Of
materials. Relating to. That topic.
That search led to the historical foundation
of the Presbyterian Church in the United States,
located at Montreat, M-O-N-T-R-E-A-T, North
Carolina.
Further inquiry?
identified the
availability of a little single bed, quote, room,
quote, in the basement of Geneva Hall,
a student dormitory
at the summer conference grounds for Southern
Presbyterians at Montree for the fee of a dollar a
night,
a sum which seemed affordable. Paragraph, so
after a quick trip home to Orange to leave my sea bag
and
participation in the marriage of some Austin
College friends in Temple, I hurried back to
Montreat
and what I thought was a stylish light blue and
white 1954 Ford Victoria quote, with white
leatherette interior.
While unpacking that vehicle at Geneva Hall, late
in the day, I inquired of Bill Dean who would be
residing in the next
accommodation
in Geneva Hall about a place to eat.
When I suggested the Montreat Dining Hall he shook
his head and
recommended a
place two buildings away
which was a frame structure operated by a retired
furniture store owner from Jacksonville,
Florida, whose wife had inherited
what was called Bridges Lodge,
a very pleasant structure.
He mentioned that the foreign missionary
appointees
and other missionaries on their sabbatical ate
there.
When I asked him why we should go there instead of
the cafeteria,
He said the food was very good, to which I
responded, check.
That it was comparatively low in price, check,
check. And that if we would wait and go to the second
table, they put all the food on the table, and we
could join then in eating that delightful blend
with the owners
of Bridges Lodge, the cook, and there were three
pretty girls from some little town in central
North Carolina that
joined, that were working there for the summer.
At my second meal in Bridges Lodge, breakfast the
next morning, a great deal of teasing centered on
one of the three young ladies
who had, after her evening chores, gone down the
hallway to shower
and then discovered that her
two
girls from her town had hidden her clothes and the
towels while she was in the shower.
In some manner, Her embarrassment and the
attractiveness of her smile during the teasing
caught my attention.
An attachment which has now lasted for
years.
Within a few weeks I asked
her, Margaret Joanne Phillips, Jo by name, to go to
the movie in Asheville
and
quickly
our
Romance warmed. By the end of the summer, I took her
home to meet her family, to spend a week in meeting
her family in central North Carolina before
returning to Rice. A complicating factor in this
relationship was that we shared the birthday of
March 18, But there was an eight-year difference
between my birth year in 1931 and hers in 1939. So
while I returned for my second year of graduate
work at Rice, she finished high school. I sent her
the money to fly to Texas. Oh, back up.
Luckily for me, the Southern Association
Southern Historical Association
was hosted by Duke University that fall and met in
Durham, North Carolina, only 20 miles east of
Mebane, M-E-B-A-N-E. That gave me a good
opportunity to see her again that fall.
One evening, During that brief visit, after I
returned to the hotel,
to the George Washington Duke Hotel in downtown
Durham,
and entered a
somewhat disorganized Lobby crowded with.
Outdated newspapers. Tobacco smoke. An evidence
of a group of historians. Unfor.
Undeniable evidence of historians.
Spare time.
Two senior.
Hotel Bellman
asked me some questions, including, quote, what
kind of guys are these men? I responded,
historians.
Then they wondered, what do they do? Do they do any
work? Yes, sir, they teach. Why do you ask?
And in summary. He mentioned that they had been.
Talking about this group and agreed upon three
generalities.
The first of which was. Quote.
Day de why day is the lightest tippers we've ever
had.
Number two, they tells the corniest jokes we've
ever heard. And number three,
they talk more about women and do less with them
than anybody that stayed in this hotel, period,
quote. As Christmas approached, I sent the money
for an airplane ticket to Joe. so she could meet my
family during the Christmas holidays.
I met her in New Orleans and drove back to Orange
and also
took her to see Rice, meet Mrs. Forbes, and then
that night parked on the beach at Galveston. I
proposed to her, and the next evening, she
accepted.
A few weeks later, when I came back to Orange on a
weekend near the end of my stay,
I told Mother that I would need
her help with addresses and she said what for and I
told her that I was that Joe and I were getting
married on June 15.
Her positive response and dad's smile were
unforgettable signs of their acceptance.
A warm feeling that lasts forever.
So as I worked on Southern Presbyterians that
year, wedding preparations were also in high
priority as I went to North Carolina during spring
break. and we prepared for the wedding.
That event on June 15 at the First Presbyterian
Church in Mebane, June 15, was by today's
standards rather modest.
The young bride and groom-to-be bought the
flowers and arranged them themselves at the A
friend of Joe's mother cooked the wedding cake,
baked the wedding cake, and her sister Doris
provided the music.
Some of the Cooper River Blue Devils came to be in
the wedding.
And we went, we drove, before we drove to
Williamsburg, Virginia for our wedding trip.
Then came back to Montreat and spent the rest of the
summer doing research before coming to Houston
and renting a small apartment
and I can't remember the name of the street.
Jo enrolled at the University of Houston as an
English major and took almost a full-time load
each semester.
Her schedule being limited only by our finances,
and the time it took for her to get to and from the
campus since we only had one vehicle.
Finances, our income at that time included the GI
Bill, about $150 a month, and an assistantship at
Rice an arrangement which I did not know existed
when I applied for admission in 1954. That
total of about $300 a month paid our rent and
allowed us to save some money.
By our third year there, we were back at 410 Emerson
where Joe cooked for Mrs. Forbes and the two of us
and kept house because Mrs. Forbes was beginning
to become a little more frail.
As that year ended, as the 1958-59 year ended,
we began to look for permanent employment.
The first opportunity was to teach
four introductory courses
each semester at the junior college, which then
operated downtown at night on the second floor of
the central Houston YMCA.
Compensation for that effort from 7 to 10 o'clock
Monday through Thursday night would have been
$2,400 for the nine-month year. Not an attractive
sum.
Then I
was contacted about filling a one-year vacancy at
Texas Southern, then
the comparatively new, primarily black
institution just north of the University of
Houston when I visited with the dean of that
institution.
And he told me the pay would be $2,800 a month,
$2,800 a year,
and patted me on the back as he chuckled.
you can be our token white boy for next year.
A third possibility came at McNeese State College
in Lake Charles, Louisiana,
less than an hour east of Orange,
where I applied.
And apparently was a finalist.
Where the pay would have been about. 3600 a year.
Thankfully. Another phone call changed.
everything for us.
But first, a step backward. In the fall of 1958, one
day in Dr. Vandiver's office, I overheard... I...
Paul... Our conversation was interrupted by a
phone call from College Station, Texas.
During that conversation, I understood that
Ralph Steen, the then deeply respected, the
highly respected head of the history department
at A&M, whose record as a historian of Texas was
unequaled,
had just been selected as the new president at
Stephen F. Austin State College in Nacogdoches.
He was calling Dr. Vandiver to ask if he had anyone
who could come up
and accept responsibility for his American
history courses on that short notice.
Dr. Vandiver recommended me and then hand me the
phone.
Soon,
I expressed fear that since I had not yet passed my
PhD preliminary exams, it might be imprudent for
me to
accept that temporary task, and so I respectfully
declined Dr. Steen's offer.
A few months later, Dr. Steen's successor as
department head, Joseph Milton Nance, also
called Vandiver.
Again, Dr. Vandiver handed me the phone,
and Dr. Nance told me that they were looking for
someone to fill a one-year vacancy because one of
their department members would be on leave at the
University of Houston for the 1959-60
academic year. The task would be teaching four
survey sections in American history. And would I
be interested? I told him that I would be. He
inquired about when I could come up for an
interview. A quick glance at my watch led to the
response that it was then 10 o'clock. Would 2
o'clock that afternoon be too late?
With a bit of lightness in his voice, he accepted
that suggestion and I drove up.
We went to Nagel Hall and I entered a new world.
Dr. Nance, a comparatively compact man, of medium
height quickly demonstrated that he
was serious and thorough in his
task
and thorough in his research. He already had
obtained
all the appropriate information about me.
And within less than two hours, he told me that the
job would be four sections of American history
numbered in the Aggie system 105 and 106.
with the reconstruction as the dividing, the
period of reconstruction as the dividing point,
that it would be a one-year assignment because
John Hill
was on leave at the University of Houston and was
expected to return the following year. The pay
would be $550 a month for nine months or He told
me that he would get a letter to me soon,
and when that epistle came, it required that I
respond in writing within 48 hours, which I very
gratefully and proudly did. And we began to make
our plans
for a year in Aggieland.
Another Aggie link
came quickly.
And once more, Dr. Vandiver was a key helper. when
the dean of Shriner College, S-C-H-R-E-I-N-E-R,
Shriner Institute in Kerrville,
called to
seek
a summer, a teacher for the summer session only.
This vacancy was created
when an old Austin college buddy, Ed Wilburn, was
going to be on leave finishing his master's
degree.
A few telephones and letters
were exchanged with Dean H. C. Weir, W-E-I-R,
who was Dean of the Institute and in fact directed
its actions on the daily basis.
By this time, Joe was expecting our first child
and as we drove out for the interview with Dean
Weir,
The
obstetrician who was assisting, who was caring
for Joe, recommended that we stop every hour for
her to quote stretch her legs and relax from
sitting in the car.
One of those stops, we made one of those stops just
inside the cattle guard of a ranch west of Austin
where she took off her shoes and cooled her feet in
the water standing underneath a little bridge.
Quickly, a pickup came our way, a pickup truck came
our way, and the man told us that we'd have to move
because we were on, we were intruding
in the pasture of the LBJ Ranch and that
we should not invade the privacy of Senator
Johnson.
The weeks at Shriner were totally enjoyable.